---
layout: chapter
title: 'Part 2: The Internet'
category: part2
---

Almost everyone uses the Internet these days: at home, at work, and even on the
go with their cell phones. Consequently, most people have a vague idea of what
the Internet is. But I think that many people would be surprised at how far from
reality their vague ideas are.

For that reason, we are going to take a similar approach as we did for Part 1
and start by digging down deep to understand the fundamentals before building up
to a complete picture. Let's do it!

You probably are aware that the Internet lets your computer communicate with
other computers around the world. Let's forget about that complicated "around
the world" part and focus just on "computers communicating".

## Protocols ##

We will first consider the simplest possible example of inter-computer
communication: two computers connected with a cable. Each computer can send data
across the cable using electrical signals and each computer can interpret
electrical signals from the cable to get the data out again. Don't worry about
the technical details here, all this means is that each computer can send bytes
to the other one.

But now we're facing a problem similar to one we've faced before. If one
computer recieves a bunch of bytes from the other, how does it know what those
bytes mean? This is just like the issue we faced when we were learning about
data: bytes can mean very different things depending on how they are
interpreted. The solution there was to agree on different formats for different
data, but this can prove problematic for inter-computer communication.

The current list of digital data formats is **huge** and new formats are being
invented all the time! It is quite common for one computer to understand a
different set of formats than another one. If we simply sent formatted data
across a wire to another computer that doesn't know the format, it would have no
idea how to read the data it receives. At the very least it wouldn't know which
bytes say how many bytes were sent and so wouldn't know which bytes are supposed
to be grouped together!

Another problem that occurs with inter-computer communication is unreliable
connections. For _intra_-computer communication - like transferring data from the
hard drive to the RAM - we usually assume that the connection is perfect and the
data will get to its destination intact. On the other hand, when data is being
transmitted to other computers via cables or wireless signals, problems often
occur. Cables can break and signals can get garbled. Even if the receiving
computer understands the data format, it needs to know when a problem is
occuring with the connection so that at the very least it knows that the data it
gets might not be correct. Ideally when a problem occurs we would like to be
able to try again until the data makes it across successfully.

To solve this problem, we agree on certain rules for computer communications.
This agreement has a special term:

<div class="alert alert-warning">
A <strong>protocol</strong> defines the rules for exchanging messages between
computers, including the data formats that will be used.
</div>
