---
layout: chapter
title: 'Practical Security'
category: part2
---

Last chapter got pretty intense with the technical talk, but it was important in
order to understand the fundamentals of security. Now that that's out of the
way, we can take a huge leap forward from the basics and talk about the more
practical dimensions of security and how to stay safe during day-to-day computer
usage.

## HTTPS ##

The first point of business is to put all of that encryption we just learned
about to work to secure the Internet. Recall that all information on the
Internet can pass through several intermediate computers before reaching its
destination. Without some extra work, _any_ information sent over the Internet
is susceptible to interception by a third party. In other words, how can you
ensure that no one other than the intended recipient is receiving your data?

This problem can be broken down into two parts:

1. How can you ensure that your packets are being routed to the correct
   destination and not to some other site (which could be owned by scammers)?
2. If your packets are being routed correctly, how can you ensure that
   intermediate computers aren't reading their contents before passing them on?

For example, if you're trying to do your online banking, scammers might redirect
your packets to their own site which pretends to be the site of your bank. Or
maybe you're intentionally connecting to a website that _looks_ like it's owned
by your bank but actually isn't! Or maybe you are connected to your bank's
actual site, but some computer on the Internet is recording all of your account
information as it routes your packets. In terms of the types of security
mentioned in the last chapter, our concerns here are mainly confidentiality and
authenticity.

Both of these concerns are resolved by using an application layer protocol
called HTTPS (rather than HTTP).

**HTTP Secure** (**HTTPS**) is a protocol that wraps HTTP in an additional
protocol layer called **Transport Layer Security** (**TLS**).
{: .definition }

In case you've lost track of all the protocols, here's what all of the protocol
layers would look like when you use HTTPS:

<div class="protocol">
IP

<div class="protocol">
TCP

<div class="protocol">
TLS

<div class="protocol">
HTTP
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>

### Certificates ###

The first thing that TLS does when connecting to a website is request the site's
"digital certificate". The certificate is some information that your computer
can use to verify that the site is the one you intended to connect to. This
verification works using a concept I call "inherited trust".

**Inherited trust** is the idea that if Alice trusts Bob and Bob trusts Charlie,
Charlie inherits Alice's trust of Bob, so Alice trusts Charlie.
{: .definition }

So how can you trust the authenticity of the site you're connecting to using
inherited trust? The solution is to introduce a neutral third party.

A **certificate authority** (**CA**) is a trustworthy, neutral third party
responsible for verifying the trustworthiness and identity of websites.
{: .definition }

When the owner of a website wants people to be able to connect to their site
using HTTPS, they contact a CA to verify their identity. If the CA trusts them,
it issues them a certificate encoding the site's identity and the CA's identity
(among other things). When your web browser receives a site's certificate via
TLS, it checks to see if the site matches the certificate and if the certificate
was issued by one of the CAs that _the browser_ trusts. If it trusts the CA that
issued it, the connection protocol proceeds. Otherwise your browser should pop
up a scary warning.

You (hopefully) trust your browser, so if your browser trusts the CA, and the CA
trusts the site, you should trust the site.

In order for the certificate to be trusted, it must be impossible for the
website owner to forge it. This is achieved using a combination of hashing
(described [later](#hashes)) and a twist on a public key cipher. The twist is
that the _encryption key is private_ and the _decryption key is public_ (this is
reversed from the last chapter). The CA encrypts every certificate using their
secret key. Everyone can read the certificates since the decryption key is
public, but since only the CA knows the encryption key this verifies that they
created the certificate.
{: .deeper }

### Encryption ###

After the identity of the website has been verified, your browser extracts a
public encryption key from the certificate and the rest of the communication
occurs under the confidentiality of encryption (using a key exchange as
described [previously][ke]).

[ke]: {{ site.baseurl }}/part2/security/#public-keys

An important thing to notice here is that the encryption (TLS) is _inside_ the
Internet and transport layers. That means that even if two computers are using
HTTPS to hide the _contents_ of their communication, they can't hide the fact
that they're communicating in the first place. Every message they send will show
the IP addresses of the sender/receiver in the open.
{: .note }

Hiding the IP addresses of the sender and receiver _is_ still possible, but it's
much more complicated (and is rarely needed). One method of doing so is called
[onion routing][on].
{: .deeper }

[on]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Onion_routing

Whenever you're doing something on the Internet that you wouldn't want someone
spying on (such as making purchases are checking e-mail), make sure that you're
using HTTPS. You can tell what protocol your browser is using from the beginning
of the address: it should be `http://` or `https://`.

## Passwords ##

Probably the most common security feature that users bump up against is
passwords. Everyone understands the concept: choose a secret phrase initially,
repeat that phrase later to gain access. Not quite so many people intuitively
know that passwords like "12345" and "password1" aren't very secure. And far
fewer people still actually know _why_ such passwords aren't secure.

To understand this topic, we will imagine ourselves as the administrators of
some website that uses passwords to secure users' accounts.

Like most websites, we will assume that we have some interface where a user can
choose a password and it is sent to us over the Internet. Later, when that user
wants to gain access to their account, they can type in a password and again
send it to us over the Internet. It's then up to us to make sure that that
password matches the original.

So how should we handle our users' passwords?

### Plaintext ###

Of course the simplest way would be to just store their original password. Then
when they try to log in later, we can simply compare their password attempt to
the stored version. Easy! And awful.

Why is this so awful? Because it presents a single massive point of failure for
our website: suppose a hacker or a disgruntled employee got access to our store
of passwords &ndash; they could then access every single account! And it can get
even worse. Have you ever reused your username and password on different sites?
Well if you did and someone steals your plaintext password on one site, they'll
now have a much easier time getting access to your account on other sites.

**Password Safety Tip #1:** choose unique passwords for each site! If you reuse
passwords and any of the sites store your password insecurely, it's as if
_every_ site stores it insecurely!
{: .note}

Have you ever used one of those "I forgot my password" things where they e-mail
you to help you get access to your account? Did they help you get into your
account by e-mailing you the password you chose (rather than making you create a
new password)? If so, be worried! That is a dead giveaway that the site is
storing your password in the clear &ndash; practically begging for some hacker
to steal it. Avoid trusting such sites with sensitive information.

### Hashes ###

So plaintext passwords are out. How can we remember a user's password
information so that we can compare it later, while not leaving the password
unprotected? If you thought of encryption, you're on the right track. But
encryption isn't quite the solution we need: if we encrypt the passwords, we
still need a key to decrypt them. That would simply move the single point of
failure from the collection of passwords to the decryption key.

If you have a really good memory, you might recall that we had a similar problem
[before][cs]: when Alice was sending Bob a book via the worst postal service
ever, we were concerned that the book Bob received might not match the version
Alice sent. In that case, we solved our problem using a checksum: a small bit of
data that acted like a summary of the data being transmitted. If the summaries
didn't match, it was pretty unlikely that the book matched the original, and
vice versa. So maybe a checksum is the tool we're looking for! When a user
chooses their password, we compute a checksum of the password and store _that_.
Then when they access their account later, we again compute the checksum and
compare.

[cs]: {{ site.baseurl }}/part2/intro/#checksums

This is getting close to being secure, but again it's not quite what we're
looking for. A checksum, as it's name implies, is more about checking that data
are correct. What we need is something that provides _security_.

First, let's take a step back. A checksum is actually a member of a broader
class of functions called _hashes_.

A **hash** is a function which takes an arbitrary number of bytes as input and
outputs a fixed number of bytes. The act of putting data in a hash function to
get output is called **hashing** the data. The output of a hash function is
called a **digest** or sometimes &ndash; confusingly &ndash; a **hash**.
{: .definition}

So whether you give your hash a gigabyte of input or 0 bytes of input, it always
produces some fixed number of bytes of output. If you look back at our
definition of checksum, you'll see that a checksum is just a special kind of
hash. In order to protect our passwords we'll need a different kind of hash.

<div class="definition">
A **cryptographic hash** is a hash where:

* given an output, it is difficult to find an input that produces it
* given an input, it is difficult to find another input that produces the same
  output
* it is difficult to find two different inputs that produce the same output
* two _nearly_ identical inputs will produce _significantly_ different outputs
</div>

Again, "difficult" here means that it should take so long for a computer to find
the solution that the information would be practically useless to the attacker
once they find it.
{: .note}

Our first example of a checksum &ndash; adding up the input bytes like positive
integers to get a single byte of output &ndash; is decidedly _not_ a
cryptographic hash:

* it is easy to find any number of inputs producing a given an output
* it is easy to modify an input such that the output remains the same
* it is easy to find two different inputs that produce the same output
* many inputs that differ by only a bit will have outputs that only differ by
  a bit

With a cryptographic hash, our process is to pass the user's chosen password
through the hash and store the output. When they log in later, we apply the same
hash to their password attempt and compare the result. But now, the features of
cryptographic hashes guard us against attackers. If someone steals the hash
outputs, to access anyone's account they'll need to find inputs that match the
outputs they have. Our hash is designed to make that really difficult.
Furthermore, they have almost no information about the relationships between
people's passwords. If Alice chooses "password1" and Bob chooses "password2",
those might produce the two hash outputs:

    10b222970537b97919db36ec757370d2
    f1f16683f3e0208131b46d37a79c8921

They're totally different! Even if the attackers figure out Alice's password,
they'll have no idea how close they are to getting Bob's!

You might think we're all set now, but there are still a few flaws with this
method. For one, what if Alice and Bob _both_ choose "password1"? The hash might
slow down the attackers, but as soon as they figure out Alice's password they'll
have Bob's too!

**Password Safety Tip #2:** try to choose really unique passwords &ndash; ones
that are unlikely to be chosen by any of the thousands of other users of the
websites you frequent. If you use a really common password, you risk
compromising your security when someone else with the same password is
compromised!
{: .note}

### Add Salt ###

So the last problem is that while hashes do a great job of protecting users who
have unique passwords, they spill the beans about users who have the same
password. After all, a hash is a function: if you give it the same input, you
_always_ get the same output.

This problem is exacerbated by another feature of cryptographic hashes: they're
really hard to design. They're so hard to make that pretty much everyone uses
the same three or four publicly-available cryptographic hash functions. Now
imagine that a bunch of websites all use the same hash function to store a
common password that is shared by a bunch of users. If that password is
compromised on any one of those sites, suddenly the attackers know who uses that
password on _all_ of the sites! Terrible!

Luckily, the solution is pretty simple. We add some extra data to the hash
input.

A **password salt** is a piece of random information which is added to the
password _before_ it is hashed. The salt does not need to be kept secret and is
usually stored alongside the hash.
{: .definition}

For example, suppose Alice and Bob both choose the terrible "password1" as their
password. For each user, our site generates a random salt:

    Alice: 2884b55c3236fcf1b9a6
	Bob:   9fc9bddc4efe8e2dd99d

Then we add these to the passwords and hash them

<pre><code>password12884b55c3236fcf1b9a6 &rarr; hash &rarr; dd42a730500e5bf784b9fe5973181328
password19fc9bddc4efe8e2dd99d &rarr; hash &rarr; c0ac4c8d37d6298310d0477e23670f9b</code></pre>

Then for each user we store the hash output along with the salt

    Alice: dd42a730500e5bf784b9fe5973181328, 2884b55c3236fcf1b9a6
	Bob:   c0ac4c8d37d6298310d0477e23670f9b, 9fc9bddc4efe8e2dd99d

So now even if lots of people reuse passwords on the same site or across many
sites, the attackers won't know. This is currently the best way we know of to
secure passwords.

### Add Entropy ###

But there's _still_ one problem and there's still one thing I haven't
explained yet: why is "password1" such a bad password? Well even if your
password storage is completely secured with a fancy cryptographic hash and random
salts, there's nothing to stop a hacker from simply guessing passwords until
they get one right.

The only reason why password guessing is a feasible strategy for hackers is
because so many computers users are lazy: in one of the largest breaches of an
improperly secured password database, hackers found that well over **2 million
users** had "123456", "123456789", or "password" as their password. That may not
be useful information for breaking into a _specific_ person's account, but
attackers who just want access to _a lot_ of accounts (whoever may own them) can
usually succeed by programming a computer to try every user name against the
most common known passwords.

Even if you manage to avoid using a really common password, there is still
danger in the form of using a really common password _pattern_. Many people
create passwords using simple patterns such as number sequences like "13579",
keyboard patterns like "qwerty", or regular English words. Because these
patterns are so simple, computers can blaze through every possibility for the
pattern in a matter of seconds. For example, suppose you make a password by
choosing some English word, adding two random digits on the end, and possibly
doing some simple letter substitutions like "@" for "a" or "$" for "s", etc.
Well there are about 173,000 English words, 10&times;10 2-digit numbers, and
&ndash; being really generous here &ndash; let's say about 20 different ways to
substitute letters in the word you chose. That means there are about
173,000&times;10&times;10&times;20=346,000,000 passwords you can make with this
method. That's not even 30 bits of information! Most computers could crank
through every possible password of that pattern in no time at all!

**Password Safety Tip #3:** whatever password you use, make sure it's at least
12 characters long. Computers these days are so fast that they can check every
possible shorter password in a reasonably short amount of time.
{: .note}

And so we come to the real challenge: how do you make a password that is hard
for a hacker to guess but still easy for you to remember?

I find it helpful to consider this question:

> If a hacker knew how I was coming up with my password, how long would it take
> for them to guess it?

For example, if your system for creating passwords is to choose a word from the
dictionary, the answer is "not very long". There is no silver bullet for coming
up with a good password, but one method that I like is to first think of some
quote or phrase that you will easily remember:

> Joseph's face was black as night<br/>
> And the pale yellow moon shone in his eyes

and choose a character for each word

    Joseph's face was black as night and the pale yellow moon shone in his eyes
	J        f    w   b     a  n     &   t   p    Y      0    s     i  h   I

The more creative, the better! Notice "&" for "and", "0" for "moon" and "I" for
"eyes". So this gives me the password

    Jfwban&tpY0sihI

Now even if an attacker knows the sort of method I'm using, there are way too
many English phrases and letter substitutions for them to guess quickly. Another
interesting approach is XKCD's [four random words][xkcd].

[xkcd]: http://xkcd.com/936/

**Password Safety Tip #4:** try to use passwords that would be hard to guess
even if an attacker knew how you were choosing them! For example, "wPE7T%+G" may
look like a random, secure password, but if your passwords on other sites are
"wPE8T%+G" and "wPE9T%+G", you're kinda shooting yourself in the foot.
{: .note}

Alternatively, you could use extremely secure but unmemorable passwords like
long strings of random characters and use a tool like [Password Safe][pw] to
help you keep track of them.
{: .deeper}

[pw]: http://passwordsafe.sourceforge.net/

And now that you know this, be **extra** cautious about so-called "password
strength" meters on websites. By definition they cannot measure the actual
strength of your passwords - only a human adversary can do that. For every
password strength meter there are false positives and negatives, weak passwords
that look strong and strong passwords that look weak.

## Malware ##

If you have ever used the Internet, hopefully you have heard about (and have
worried about) _malware_. If not, maybe you are more familiar with one of the
many _types_ of malware: worms, Trojans, viruses, adware, spyware, backdoors,
rootkits, etc. The specific kinds don't really matter to us since our goal is
always the same: to keep them off of our computers.

**Malware** (short for **malicious software**) is a program that does something
bad to your computer. Most malware tries to do so secretly.
{: .definition }

This definition is intentionally vague because there are a lot of "bad" things
that a program can do to your computer. It could try to steal your personal
information, monitor your behavior, take control of your computer, damage your
computer, use your computer for illegal activities, or simply spread itself to
other computers. There are also a lot of ways that malware tries to conceal
itself. It may simply try to lay low and run in a way that you won't notice or
it may try to disguise itself as a program that you recognize and trust.

Getting malware off of a computer is a notoriously difficulty problem, and there
are lots of companies that will try to sell you "antivirus" software that they
claim can identify and remove malware. I'm not writing this book to debate the
relative merits of the various antivirus programs out there, but there are a few
points to keep in mind about them:

* The easiest way for malware to infect a computer is due to user error. Thus
  many antivirus programs try to "protect" your computer by heavily restricting
  your control of your own computer. It is not always obvious whether these
  restrictions are worth the protection
* New malware programs are frequently released by hackers around the world. Some
  antivirus programs check for malware by looking at a list of known threats.
  Such antivirus programs will not be able to detect these new malware programs
  since they won't be on any list. Instead the antivirus program must be
  frequently updated to add new malware to the list of known threats. A computer
  can never be _permanently_ secure.
* Some antivirus programs instead try to look for programs acting "suspiciously"
  and alert the user to determine whether these are actual threats. This can be
  very disruptive to the user if the antivirus has a lot of false positives. It
  can also be very ineffective if the user isn't familiar with what is/isn't
  malware.

Consequently, it is a very bad idea to rely on an antivirus program to
automatically handle your malware problems. The best defense against malware
is to educate yourself about malware so that you can avoid getting it on your
computer in the first place. But having some sort of antivirus as a backup can
be a good idea too.

There are generally two ways that malware gets onto your computer:

1. By exploiting software that you use
2. By tricking you into putting it on your computer

### Exploits ###

It is nearly impossible to create a computer program that works correctly 100%
of the time. If any software developer tells you that their software is totally
bug-free, they are lying (possibly to themselves). Such bugs can often be
exploited by hackers to gain access to programs or computers that they should
not be able to. The [National Vulnerability Database][nvd] maintains a list of
such bugs, which stands at about 67 _thousand_ at the time of writing. When
these bugs are in the software that you use and trust every day &ndash; your
operating system, web browser, e-mail program, etc. &ndash; they can become
avenues for hackers to install malware on your computer.

[nvd]: https://web.nvd.nist.gov

Unfortunately there is very little that you can do to protect yourself against
exploits. Your best bet is to hope that the software developers are aware of
these vulnerabilities and will release newer versions that are fixed. Thus you
should strive to keep all of your software up-to-date.

If a known vulnerability goes unfixed by the developers, your only real option
is to get rid of the vulnerable software in order to protect yourself.

### User Error ###

As scary as exploits are, they are actually pretty uncommon sources of malware
infection when it comes to everyday computer use. That is because many exploits
can be technically difficult for a hacker to take advantage of. And why bother
with a difficult solution when it's so much easier to trick a user into
installing malware themselves?

This is what superusers would call "problem exists between keyboard and chair"
(PEBKAC, for short). The malware isn't the real issue and removing it won't
solve anything, because the _real_ problem is that the user is installing
the malware and will probably continue to do so unintentionally.

Here's how a typical PEBKAC situation might unfold:

1. Bob needs to make some changes to a PDF he received from a client
2. Bob discovers that he doesn't have any software on his computer for changing
   a PDF file
3. So Bob Googles for "free PDF editor download" and clicks a link that looks
   promising
4. He downloads a program and starts it, which opens an "Installer". He clicks
   "Next" a few times to get through some screens with buttons and checkboxes,
   but finally the PDF editor opens and Bob gets his work done

Did Bob just install some malware on his computer? I would be willing to bet
that he did. Why? Because Bob just downloaded some random software from the
Internet without looking into who he was getting it from. Even worse, it was
_free_.

Remember that phrase "there's no such thing as a free lunch"? That is generally
true for free software as well. But there are a few kinds of "free" when it
comes to software, and each carries a different level of risk.

**Open source software** is software that is not only free, but where the
software developers openly invite members of the public to contribute to the
development of the software (or at least let them see how the software is made).
{: .definition }

**Shareware** is software that is free, but is limited in some way unless you
pay the developers for the "full version". For example shareware might stop
working after a certain amount of time, or certain key features might be
disabled.
{: .definition }

**Freeware** is free software (which is _not_ open source).
{: .definition }

Open source software is generally very trustworthy and should be preferred when
possible. You can trust open source because it is very hard to hide malware in a
program that the public can watch the development of. However it is also the
least common type of free software on the Internet. Shareware is much more
common, and is also generally trustworthy (though a little less so since you
don't get to see how it's made). However shareware can be pretty frustrating due
to the limitations designed to entice you to pay for it.

Freeware, however, is extremely problematic. It's not open source, so you can't
verify that it's safe, and the developer's motives for making it free can be
questionable since they have nothing obvious to gain. Many freeware programs
will sneak in malware that collects your personal information or monitors your
web browsing activity so that the developer can sell it to advertisers. Others
may even take complete control of your computer and hold it ransom until you pay
the developers. You should always be extremely cautious when downloading
freeware.

That being said, there is some wonderful freeware on the Internet that has
earned people's trust through years of malware-free service. It's not a simple
matter of avoiding freeware entirely.

And of course that doesn't mean that non-free software is guaranteed to be
malware-free. There are few known instances of companies trying to sneak malware
into the software they sell.

The Internet isn't the only way that malware can spread. Portable USB thumb
drives are also a common way for malware to get from computer to computer.
Really, _any_ method of transferring data from one computer to another could be
used to transfer malware and should fall under the same scrutiny as a download
from the Internet.
{: .note }

### Download Responsibly ###

Clearly, avoiding malware is a complicated issue. There are no hard rules, no
strict steps to follow. Ultimately you will need to develop "street smarts": an
intuition for when some software seems "sketchy" or unsafe.

When looking to download software from the Internet, there are a few precautions
you can take that should help to avoid malware:

* Prefer downloading from the "official website" of the software. If you know
  the particular program you want, try to find out who makes it and what their
  website is (Wikipedia and news articles can be useful for finding it). If the
  official site doesn't provide the download itself, it should at least tell you
  where to acquire the software.
* The official site should also tell you what kind of software it is. If the
  official site says it's open source, you can safely ignore any shareware
  downloads you find since they are probably ripoffs.
* Avoid websites that just provided freeware downloads of a variety of software
  (unless the software's official website sends you there). Such downloads are
  often bundled with malware or do not include the latest updates from the
  developer.
* Prefer software with a community to vouch for it. If you Google the software
  and have a hard time finding people discussing it positively, you might want
  to find an alternative. There is almost always alternative software that will
  get the job done.
* Sites that provide free software downloads often get their revenue by
  displaying ads on the download page. But these advertisers are tricky: since
  they know the ads will display on a download page, they make their ads look
  like the "Download" button so that you will click them accidentally. Be
  **extra** careful that you are clicking the right link when you download free
  software.

## Exercises ##

<div class="exercise">
1. Find out how your browser indicates that a site's identity is either
   unverified, verified, or invalid. Many sites let you connect with HTTP or
   HTTPS so you can see the difference. For example,
   [http://www.wikipedia.org](http://www.wikipedia.org) and
   [https://www.wikipedia.org](https://www.wikipedia.org). To see how your
   browser handles invalid certificates, [this site](https://tv.eurosport.com/)
   (at the time of writing) has a certificate that doesn't match its identity.
   For extra credit, try to find the list of CAs that your browser trusts.
2. Connect to a site with HTTPS and see what information your browser can tell
   you about its certificate. At minimum, you should be able to see which CA
   issued the certificate and when it expires.
3. In the section on [hashes](#hashes), I briefly mentioned why our
   example checksum is not a cryptographic hash function. Demonstrate this with
   concrete examples for each of the four features of cryptographic hashes.
4. Come up with a couple different password generation methods and try to count
   their strength in terms of the number of possible password choices. You may
   have to estimate a few counts (read the section on [making
   passwords](#add-entropy) again to see how to count password possibilities).
   Which methods seem like a good trade-off between strength/memorability?
5. Try to find the "official" download sites for the following software. Also
   determine if the software is open source, shareware, freeware, or none of the
   above.
    * Paint.NET
    * Photoshop
    * The GIMP
</div>
