---
layout: chapter
title: 'Operating Systems'
category: part3
---

You may already be familiar with the term "operating system". It's the thing
that usually comes pre-installed when you buy a new computer. Apple's OS X and
Microsoft's Windows are probably the ones you've heard of. But what are they?

An **operating system** or **OS** is a collection of programs that makes a
computer practical to use.
{: .definition}

I admit that this definition is as vague as it is terrible. But the main point
here is that a kernel alone is not an OS. A kernel is an essential part of every
modern OS, but on its own it does basically nothing &ndash; it needs other
programs to run in order to be really useful. So an operating system is really
just a kernel plus those "other programs". But which other programs? That varies
between different OSes and is often a selling point for the companies that make
them. Some common inclusions are a program for managing separate user accounts,
a program for finding and organizing files, programs for opening common file
formats like text and video, a web browser, things like that.

Next we're going to play around with an OS to really get a feel for how they
work. But we need to do a little preparation so that you can follow along with
the book easily.

## Virtual Machine ##

It would be great if you could just start fooling around on your own computer in
order to learn about being a superuser, but I'm afraid that wouldn't be very
responsible of me. It's easy to screw things up as a superuser &ndash;
especially an inexperienced one. Also I don't know what kind of computer you're
using so it's hard for me to give you any specific tips. So for this chapter
we're going to use one standard computer with a standard OS so that everyone
gets the same experience. As a bonus, this standard computer also lets us save
our work in case anything goes awry. Don't worry though: you don't need to go
out and buy a new computer.

You're going to need to download a computer. This is (surprisingly) easy to do
thanks to [Turing completeness][turing]. All you need is a program which
simulates a computer inside your actual computer.

[turing]: {{ site.baseurl }}/part1/complete/

A simulated computer is often called a **virtual machine** because it exists
only in the digital memory of your computer. But other than that it works just
like a normal one.
{: .definition}

The program we're going to use to do this is [VirtualBox][vb], a free and open
source virtual machine manager. Steel yourself for possibly the hardest exercise
in the book so far:

[vb]: https://www.virtualbox.org

Install and configure VirtualBox. **Hint:** the [VirtualBox User Manual][manual]
has sections on installing and starting VirtualBox
{: .exercise}

[manual]: https://www.virtualbox.org/manual/UserManual.html

You don't need to worry about actually creating a virtual machine: we will be
using one I created ahead of time. You'll need to download it using a BitTorrent
client, so go [review][torrent] that section if you don't remember what that is.

[torrent]: {{ site.baseurl }}/part2/torrents

Download the virtual machine using this [torrent file][vmt].
{: .exercise}

<!-- TODO -->
[vmt]: #
