---
layout: chapter
title: "Beginning the Journey"
---

Congratulations! By starting to read this guide you have already set yourself
apart from so many simpletons out there. A healthy thirst for knowledge and the
willingness to read long, boring documents to acquire said knowledge is an
important trait of any superuser. I'll do my best to minimize the boringness so
long as you keep up the knowledge thirstiness.

What is a Superuser?
--------------------

On a computer system, the superuser is the one user with complete control over
the system. You might not realize this, but chances are that on the very
computer that you are using to read this guide there is information you cannot
access and tasks you are not allowed to perform. That is because you are a
regular user rather than a superuser. And for good reason! Certain information
on your computer is extremely sensitive. If the information becomes corrupted
you could lose your personal files, crash the computer, or even cause
irreversible damage to it! The superuser has no restrictions when using the
computer, which means an ignorant superuser can easily cause serious damage to a
computer by acting carelessly. On the flipside, a superuser can tweak and tailor
a computer's every behavior to suit their needs. Since the superuser has no
restrictions, she also has the most responsibility!

Technically speaking, it is quite trivial to become the superuser on your
personal computer. Being able to handle the burden of being superuser is another
matter entirely! When I refer to "becoming a superuser" in this book, what I
almost always mean is acquiring the knowledge and skills necessary to be a
responsible, benevolt one. In order to be a good superuser, you need to have a
solid understanding of how computers work and the various systems involved in
their operation. When you understand your computer, you are better able to
operate it as the superuser without causing harm.

There are many skills that I consider essential to being a superuser. I will
mention them throughout this guide as they become relevant, or you can look at
the full list on the side. Let's get a few to start:

* A superuser is always thirsty for knowledge (I got excited and mentioned this
  earlier). Every tidbit of computer knowledge is of interest to a superuser -
  though some tidbits are of more interest than others.

* RTFM (three of the letters stand for Read The Manual). It is often tempting to
  seek out an expert to answer your computer questions, but it is essential that
  a superuser be able to acquire knowledge on her own. Just about every bit of
  technology in the world has an associated manual, and most are available for
  free, though they are sometimes not easy to find. Many experts on the Internet
  will refuse to answer a question if it's clear that the asker made no effort
  to figure it out on their own first.

* A superuser learns by doing. You can read as much as you want about computers
  and technology, but you haven't learned a thing until you get down and dirty
  at a keyboard to apply the concepts yourself.

That should be enough to get us started. Now let's get excited! What benefits
are there to being a true superuser?

* A superuser is her own tech support. You can save time and money by fixing
  your own problems.

* A superuser is a safer user. 99% of the dangers of computer use are spawned
  from laziness and ignorance. The more you understand your computer, the more
  you will be able to protect yourself and it from cyber threats.

* A superuser can tweak and specialize a computer to perform a wider variety of
  tasks, to operate more efficiently, and to better fit her needs. As a true
  superuser, your computer will feel like your room: all of your favorite things
  at hand, your possessions precisely arranged for ease of access, pleasing
  decor, comfort, familiarity, etc.

By now you are hopefully excited. If not, consider taking an invigorating walk
or something. We begin with Part 1.
